Add readme to packages/cms about lokalize texts (#2959)
minvws/nl-covid19-data-dashboard: packages/cms/README.md

# CMS

## Lokalize Texts

This document is aimed at developers with access to the Sanity CMS. It describes
some of the ins and outs around locale texts that we use to translate
short-copy. These text strings used to be in a tool called Lokalize and even
though they now live as documents in Sanity, we still tend to refer to them as

> lokalize texts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'lokalize texts'.
```

The scripts mentioned in this document are currently available from the

> `packages/cms` root.

Reviewer: Aren't the scripts specifically located in `packages/cms/src/lokalize` ?

```suggestion
`packages/cms/src/lokalize` root.
```

Author: The text refers to yarn commands and those should be executed from the cms package root. I don't think it matters for public interface where the source files live.

> ### Key Takeaways

Reviewer: :100: good to have this

In summary these are the most important things you should be aware of:

> - Run `yarn lokalize:export` to bring your local JSON files up-to-date with the

Reviewer: The add functionality is missing from this key take aways.

Perhaps format that one, and this existing `yarn lokalize:export`, as `[command] - [one sentence explanation]` ?

  Sanity dataset. The Typescript compiler will error when your JSON files do not
  contain all the texts which are referenced in the code.
- Use the command line tool to add and remove short-copy texts to/from the
  Sanity development dataset. Every mutation is logged to `key-mutations.csv`.
  This file is used to synchronize the changes to the production dataset when
  needed. If you need to add multiple keys you can do this by editing the JSON
  file (read more below). You should **never** have to manually edit the
  mutations file.

> - Merge conflicts in the mutations file will be very common, but **always**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Merge conflicts in the mutations file are common, but **always**
```

  choose to **accept both changes**, so that you never remove any mutations. You
  do not have to worry about the order of the timestamps, as these mutations are
  sorted before they are applied.

> - When a feature branch gets merged, the `sync-after-feature` script is ran

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When a feature branch gets merged, the `sync-after-feature` script runs
```

  them for upcoming release.
- After a release, we run the `sync-after-release`, which then strips all keys
  from production that are not in use in development anymore. This also clears
  the mutations log file which should then be committed. **Do not delete texts
  from development between deploying the release and running the
  `sync-after-release` script**.

### Mutations File

All mutation to the development dataset that are done via the CLI interface are
logged in the mutations file. This file contains the timestamp, key and action
for each mutation.

The mutation file is used to synchronize texts at different times in the
development/release flow.

You should not have to edit this file manually. The mutations log can be cleared
after a release, but if this doesn't happen it also won't hurt to keep appending
mutations over multiple sprints. The sync logic should be clever enough to
figure out what mutations are still relevant.

Whenever the mutations file is read, the different mutations are "collapsed" so
that additions and deletions cancel each other out where needed. The timestamps in this file do not have to be in order, as all rows get sorted
by the sync scripts.

> Merge conflicts in this file will be very common. You should always "accept both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Merge conflicts in this file are common. You should always "accept both
```

changes" when resolving conflicts, so that none of the lines are ever deleted.

### Export

The application reads its locale strings from
`packages/app/public/nl-export.json` and `packages/app/public/en-export.json`.
These JSONs are exported from the Sanity lokalize documents but they are not
part of the repository. Therefore you will regularly need to run `yarn lokalize:export` in order to keep your local JSON file up-to-date with the
Sanity dataset. For Typescript these JSONs are a static data source, so it will
complain when they do not contain all the keys that are used in the code.

### Adding Texts

You can run `yarn lokalize:add` from the repository root to add a text to
the Sanity lokalize section in the development dataset. There are a few
different flavors for convenience.

New texts only need an NL string when they are added. EN is optional and will
use NL as a fallback.

After adding a text, the export script is called to update your local JSON file.

#### Flags

Without any flags the user is presented with an interactive prompt to specify

> what key you want to add. This is using auto-completion on existing keys to easily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what key you want to add. This is using auto-completion on existing keys to
```

find a nested location.

Using the `-k` or `--key` flag you can pre-specify the key/path in dot notation
that the new text should get.

> Using the `-s` or `--sync` flag allows you to easily add multiple texts at once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `-s` or `--sync` flag allows you to add multiple texts at once
```

> by simply making your edits directly in the JSON file at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by making your edits directly in the JSON file at
```

`packages/app/public/nl-export.json`. The script will then compare all the keys
in your local JSON file with the Sanity dataset and present you with a list of
all keys that would become additions. You can then select which ones to actually
add, and it injects the existing texts for each.

#### Flow to Production

Texts are first added to the development dataset. When the feature branch gets
merged, a GitHub action will inject any new texts into the production dataset
and flag them as being new.

The communication team is then able to see a list of newly added texts and
prepare them for an upcoming release.

### Deletings Texts

Texts can be deleted via `yarn lokalize:delete`

Because all feature branches plus the development deployment all use the same

> Sanity dataset, we can not simply remove a lokalize text document from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sanity dataset, we can not remove a lokalize text document from the
```

Author: Simply here should not offend anybody as it talks about things not being simple

following logic:

1. Apply deletions to the development set. This will likely break other feature
   branches, but at this point those branches can be updated with the develop
   new commits.
2. Sync additions to the production set. Any text that was added as part of this
   feature branch is added to the production set so that the communication team
   can prepare the texts for the upcoming release. These text get a special flag
   so they appear in their own list on the Sanity dashboard.

If the text additions of a feature branch get deleted after the branch was
merged, those deletions will propagate to production after the release using the
`sync-after-release` script.

### Sync After Release

The `sync-after-release` script should be triggered manually shortly after a
release has been deployed to production. It can not really hurt to forget to run
it, but it can break the production build when it is triggered at the wrong
time, so make sure you understand the logic behind it.

1. Prune the production set by applying deletions. Any key that has been deleted
   from the development set as part of a feature branch, or a key that was added

>    in a feature branch but later got deleted anyway, will be removed from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   in a feature branch but later got deleted anyway, are removed from
```

though they now live as documents in Sanity, we still tend to refer to them as
lokalize texts.

The scripts mentioned in this document are currently available from the
`packages/cms` root.

### Key Takeaways

In summary these are the most important things you should be aware of:

- Run `yarn lokalize:export` to bring your local JSON files up-to-date with the
  Sanity dataset. The Typescript compiler will error when your JSON files do not
  contain all the texts which are referenced in the code.
- Use the command line tool to add and remove short-copy texts to/from the
  Sanity development dataset. Every mutation is logged to `key-mutations.csv`.
  This file is used synchronize the changes to the production dataset when
  needed. If you need to add multiple keys you can do this by editing the JSON
  file (read more below). You should **never** have to manually edit the
  mutations file.
- Merge conflicts in the mutations file will be very common, but **always**
  choose to **accept both changes**, so that you never remove any mutations. You
  do not have to worry about the order of the timestamps, as these mutations are
  sorted before they are applied.

> - When a feature branch gets merged, the `sync-after-feature` script is ran

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a (feature) branch gets merged into develop, the `sync-after-feature` script is ran
```

  which adds new texts to production so that the communication team can prepare
  them for upcoming release.

> - After a release, we run the `sync-after-release`, which then strips all keys

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- After a release, we manually run the `sync-after-release`, which then strips all keys
```

Sanity dataset. For Typescript these JSONs are a static data source, so it will
complain when they do not contain all the keys that are used in the code.

### Adding Texts

You can run `yarn lokalize:add-text` from the repository root to add a text to
the Sanity lokalize section in the development dataset. There are a few
different flavors for convenience.

New texts only need an NL string when they are added. EN is optional and will
use NL as a fallback.

After adding a text, the export script is called to update the JSON file.

#### Flags

Without any flags the user is presented with an interactive prompt to specify what
key you want to add. This using autocompletion on existing keys to easily find a
nested location.

Using the `-k` or `--key` flag you can pre-specify the key/path in dot notation
that the new text should get.

Using the `-s` or `--sync` flag allows you to easily add multiple texts at once
by simply making your edits directly in the JSON file at
`packages/app/public/nl-export.json`. The script will then compare all the keys
in your local JSON file with the Sanity dataset, and present you with a prompt

> of all the ones that would be additions. You can then select which ones to add.

Reviewer 2: You could add that in theory it's possible, though unlikely, the same key is already added in another branch, thus not showing up in the 'diff'. Therefore always validate all keys you expect there to be are present.

Author: If the same key is already added there is not really anything to validate I think. After this script the export is run and your locally added text will be overwritten with whatever is in the development set. I don't think you even need to be aware of this since its such an edge case and the default behaviour is fine IMO.

#### Flow to Production

Texts are first added to the development dataset. When the feature branch gets
merged, a GitHub action will inject any new texts into the production dataset
and flag them as being new.

The communication team is then able to see a list of newly added texts and
prepare them for an upcoming release.

### Deletings Texts

> Texts can be deleted via `yarn lokalize:add-text`

Reviewer 3: delete-text?

> Texts can be deleted via `yarn lokalize:add-text`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Texts can be deleted via `yarn lokalize:delete-text`
```

Because all feature branches plus the development deployment all use the same
Sanity dataset, we can not simply remove a lokalize text document from the
dataset without potentially breaking other branches.

For this reason, when you delete a lokalize text, it will append the delete

> action to the mutations file but not actually delete the document. This actions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
action to the mutations file but not actually delete the document. This action
```
